[BLANK_AUDIO]
So this is one of the questions that I get asked the most, the hardest for me to answer.
What is yeast?
I've just been with this question, what is life?
What is a soul?
I don't know how to explain to someone what yeast is.
So mostly, what I want you to know about yeast is that, this,
This can be instant, it's active, and it's alive.
So it's an organism that is alive.
It's somewhere in-- it's got its own category of aliveness
that we'll see in a second.
But the most important part is the alive.
The reason I include the animal phylogeny chart as well
is to think about the umbrella of animal
encompasses a lot of different animals.
Well, diversity is phenomenally huge.
Yeast is similar.
Oh, wow.
That's very strong.
The umbrella of yeast is equally a huge umbrella.
There's huge diversity in yeast.
A lot of the times we use yeast as one thing.
Yeast is this one thing.
I want people to understand that it is this umbrella term
for a lot of diversity of microorganisms,
the way that animal encompasses humans and elephants.
And also, in the tree of life, animals and fungi
are very close to each other.
So earlier when we were rehydrating the yeast
and I was talking about its feelings and being gentle
and to thinking about its stress and thinking about its comfort
and all of these kind of attributes,
it's not just a quirk of mine.
I do think of these as my pets.
And I think that goes a long way into thinking about the care
of our fermentation. I care about the health of my fermentation, the way I care about the feelings of my yeast,
because these two organisms are very close on the whole tree of life. So it's not an unfair comparison.
And the other thing I will bring up,
so going this way, is that a lot of times
yeast cells are used in a lot of studies because they resemble animal cells very, very closely.
So this is a very well-studied organism and just kind of gives people a little bit of a background as to why I treat
the way that I do and the other thing I include is
kind of this little bit parsing out a lot of the times we're using yeast too broadly, too general and
This is a little bit more in Spanish that kind of all of these words are just "hormos"
Mushroom is an ongo and then a mold is an ongo and then a yeast is an ongo and the whole category
So in Spanish, we're very limited in our vocabulary and it's hard because a lot of the times we want
We want to be technical and we're using technical terms and we don't realize how often our coffee terms are very slangy or colloquial
or just very very regional
So I just want to bring some awareness to the language that we're using and when we're mixing our technical words
and when we're mixing our local words and where we're just kind of
Making stuff up because all of this gets blended. So we've kind of the theme is like we have a very unique foundation for coffee
There's a lot of people
Especially potentially consumers people on the outside think coffee is a very well-developed industry and they're just like not aware
"Oh, I just haven't learned these things yet."
But most of the, most professional producers, you know, fifth generation people that have done this their whole lives
also don't know these words and don't know the terminology and get all of this stuff really mixed up.
So, it's kind of a proceed with caution scenario.
And to not really take for granted when people are using these words.
You know, it's perfectly okay to say, "What do you mean by that?"
"What does that mean to you?"
"What does that mean?"
So that means, like we were talking about lulum,
which is the juice that we had.
And we're like, well, what do you call this in Ecuador?
What do you call this in Mexico?
And like, we all have different words for the same fruit.
So it's really nice to be able to take a pause
and say, what do you mean by that?
So this is what I mean by yeast.
This is what I mean by these microorganisms.
So along those lines that yeast cells
are very similar to human cells,
I think about these things. I'm very concerned about my yeast in terms of my fermentation.
I care about the environment. So what am I bringing my yeast to? How gentle am I waking them up?
The other thing is if we had yeast in the refrigerator, coming from a cold place,
and then I'm going to shock it with warm water, and then I'm going to put it in a cold tank.
These are the things that I think about.
So yeast is a fungi?
Yes.
Okay.
Exactly.
I think about my temperature, right?
So, is it too hot, is it too cold?
Where am I storing my yeast?
How is my fermentation?
Is too much heat going to be stressful?
Or is too much cold going to be stressful?
We can think about yeast having behavior.
There are some yeasts that are very aggressive.
Sema is a very aggressive yeast.
We've seen the bubbles when it was rehydrating.
We saw there was a lot of activity.
There's a lot of bubbles.
It dominates the fermentation really strongly
and very completely.
And there's other yeasts that are very timid.
that take longer to build up their biomass
and take longer to start their fermentation process.
So I do think of yeast as having personalities.
Some are aggressive, some are shy,
some are really delicate.
You have to have this really narrow temperature window.
Others are like bulldozers
and they can just tolerate all of these temperature extremes.
These are all things to keep in mind
when we're just using the one word of yeast.
Stress is also kind of lack,
Things that can be stressful are lack of food.
So if you're coming into a really nutrient depleted media,
meaning maybe it's a farm that hasn't had the money
to fertilize, that they've missed several cycles,
that the coffee is very weak plants.
Just like we can have a poorly, low nutrition,
high stress plant, we can have a low nutrition,
high stress fermentation.
These things correlate pretty well.
And then also competition.
So this is competition in terms of microbial competition.
All of the other microbes that are coming in from the field
competing with the yeast that I'm trying to introduce.
So am I giving it difficult conditions?
Like, am I starting it out in like,
in a gentle and kind of a way that it can flourish?
Or am I giving the yeast a lot of challenges?
Challenges with temperature,
challenges with not enough food,
challenges with not enough nutrients.
So in terms of nutrition, in wine fermentation,
it is basic that we add nutrients.
We inoculate with yeast and we add nutrients
to our fermentation.
These go hand in hand.
You don't do one without the other.
Because a wine fermentation is very long.
You want these yeast to survive for two weeks,
four weeks, and if you have a really cold,
cool white wine fermentation, you can have five weeks.
So you can have 35 days of fermentation.
that yeast is gonna need a lot of help along that way.
In coffee, our fermentations are 24 hours, 36 hours,
they're much shorter.
So the added cost of nutrients is a hard pill to swallow.
When the cost of yeast is,
the cost of fertilizer is already a big barrier,
and now you're gonna have yeast,
and now you're saying,
"Well, now we need to buy a yeast nutrient."
It's a lot.
But if you're having stressed, difficult fermentations,
that's one place to potentially invest.
So it's not, again, the first place to start,
but a lot of producers are the bigger ones
that have more resources have started
to buy some yeast nutrient to help
their fermentations along.
So this picture is a mill that I worked at in El Salvador,
and this is kind of to show also the scale.
So this fermentation has yeast in it.
We did the yeast fermentation,
'cause I had to, 'cause I was hired to go there and do that,
but I wouldn't let them use the other tank.
They wanted to fill up the whole Beneisio.
Because so often, they're trying to use yeast,
they're putting in this investment,
it's much more advanced,
but the basics haven't been covered.
That tank is a completely different situation,
temperature, than the one on the side.
So a lot of the times as producers,
we kind of overlook the more basic things.
We kind of try to run before we can walk.
So here it's in open air.
it's very hot. So for me, I'm like, before you buy yeast, like maybe build a wall.
Or let's have a roof. You know, like I think about the structure and the
protection before we go to this like next level solutions. And even though I
only let them use this one tank that was in the shade, it's still part of my tank
is in the sun. So this slice of my fermentation is at a completely different
temperature and environment than the rest of it. So too often we think of like
one fermentation, one mass. There's all these layers of different things that
are going on. So one fermentation is not just one result. So in our yeast
today we saw that the outer edge of the tank was at a different temperature than
the inner part. We are inoculating, so that temperature difference doesn't
bother me so much because I have added the yeast, I'm dominating, I'm minimizing those
effects. But if I wasn't adding yeast, if it was just the wild yeast that was coming
in from the field, there would be a different one on the outside, as the inside, as the
top, as the bottom, and so I would be having 15 different fermentations depending on the
geometry of my tang. And that really affects your consistency and your cup-to-cup variability.
So it's something you can manage.
You can jacket your tank, you can have temperature control,
that we talked about with Caleb earlier today.
You can manage your, you can put,
well, what's your design idea?
What have you thought about?
- I thought about just using a, like,
copper tube heat exchanger,
and then pumping either hot or cold water through it,
so making like a big coil that just goes in the tank,
and then having temperature controllers
control pumps that will either come out of the cold water through the boil as a heat exchange.
That's really brilliant. I love that idea. I would love to see that kind of come to life
because it's a huge concern in these fermentations. They can, in a small container, they can vary
dramatically. So imagine multiply by two tons, five tons, these giant eggs. Your temperature
gradient is going to be much bigger and your variation is going to be much greater.
So would that change if you're able to like somehow like stir it around like frequently?
Potentially. If you're stirring frequently, then you are homogenizing the temperature.
So you know, can you stir often enough to compensate for how quickly it'll warm up?
Right. You have to have somebody like walking through that the whole time.
Maybe. I mean, maybe it's slow enough that it may, you know, it would depend. But I think
if you just stay in front of that, if you can mix faster, then it warms up.
Yeah. Yes. Usually like mixing is supposed to slow it down a bit because for example if we're
thinking about the sourdough, so you fold the bread like for example four or five times during
straining, so you're basically a bit like slowing down the how fast the fermentation of the bread
happens. Potentially. So with these yeast, mixing can do one of two things. First, you're homogenizing
your temperature, which is great, but you could be disrupting your activity. So in sourdough,
that's what we want. We want to kind of interrupt that. We're changing the structure of those
proteins. You want to make different connections, and we're trying to get that structure. So you are
interrupting, disrupting a process. But potentially, a lot of these yeast, which we'll see a little bit
a little bit later, need a little bit of oxygen for their regeneration to create new generations.
So you could be feeding them micro-dosing oxygen to help them grow faster.
So, biology we can do both. We can disrupt the system with the same action or we could
be accelerating the system with that same action. So mixing is kind of one of those
like, it depends. It depends on what we're trying to accomplish and it depends on what's
what's present there if it's a disruption and slowing down or if it's accelerating and
getting more of a reaction. And the only way to know that is to try it? The only way to know that
is to try it or to be really aware of what microbe you're adding. So like how we were adding the sema
I know that with this Saccharomyces cerevisiae it needs a micro dose of oxygen when it's mixing
and helping it regenerate more because I know this one. Is it going to still be called anaerobic?
So we will get there. So hold that thought.
So this is just a review of what we did this morning of your math of you know 100 kilos of
bulk coffee so one to one kilo grams of yeast times 10 of water and then your water is based
on your grams of yeast 37 Celsius. So this is just a summary of what we did this morning.
But is we measure in pergamino or in cherry?
Pergamino.
Well, it's mass of whatever you're using.
So if you were going to do a cherry fermentation, you would do kilos of cherry to yeast.
Which is why I don't recommend yeast with naturals because you're using twice the yeast
because your mass is double and then you're just going to throw half of it away later.
So you're like throwing away twice as much yeast because you're getting rid of that half
of that coffee mass. So yeah, it's one of those things that this is already
expensive, so to do it on cherries is more double the cost if you're trying to
control, if you're trying to control the process. So one of the ways that you can
use yeast is as a bio control, meaning I want to reduce what's coming in from the
field, and you're using it as like, like insurance, and not necessarily because
you want these flavors to dominate, but it's more of an insurance to prevent
defects and prevent like some unknowns coming in from the field. So it's not
that it has no use, but it's not its best use. It's not the best. For me it's not
worth it for the kind of application that I'm trying to do, which is have
maximum impact on the flavor. So doing it in cherry is like starting a race kind
behind. It's like I want to get to my seed as soon as possible.
My method.
Oh yeah.
Yesterday, you said you had a little bit of a chewy bite,
and there's going to be a lot of microorganisms,
and you're going to increase your dosage a little bit.
How do you calculate that?
It's just experience. So sometimes when I go to a mill
that uses recycled water, so I know the charge is higher than
is higher than recycled water, because they use it
for a couple of batches.
If I see that there's a lot of overripes,
if I see that their tanks are really dirty,
and I have to use yeast--
first, I'm like, OK, let's stop and not do this.
But if I have to, then that's when
I would increase the dosage.
And it's not like, if I see this dirty tank, I add 20%.
It's just like a feeling.
I'm like, a little bit more.
It's just like an experience of like,
want to give the yeast a little bit more of a chance because there's so much pressure
from either the dirtiness of the tank, the reused water, the cherry that's coming in,
like all of these sources. So yeah, I don't have a specific answer. It's just like I eyeball it and I feel it out.
But we shouldn't use less than this, right?
We shouldn't use less. So we'll talk about that a little bit later as well, but yeah, that's a really important point that because the yeast is so expensive
And we're like, well, I'll just use half,
or I'll just use a little bit so that I can just stretch it.
And for me, stretching, you might as well not use any,
because the point of the yeast is consistency
and domination.
And if you underdose, you don't dominate,
so you don't have consistency.
So then why are you using the yeast?
Just wing it.
So either use none or have your current dosage.
For me, underdosing really defeats the purpose.
'Cause you don't have that confidence.
It's like, it's the same with the pH meter.
If you're gonna have a pH meter, great,
but if you're not gonna calibrate it,
then your pH meter's not giving you any confidence
about what you're measuring.
- But if someone wants to, like,
expand it first, I mean, the yeast,
that is so expensive.
- Yeah.
- You start growing, I mean,
I mean, like, before...
Like a mother culture.
Yeah, and then, I mean, you can, like, you can increase, I mean, you can expand the use
before using it.
Yeah.
Do you recommend it?
That, I do not.
I do not recommend it, and I'll tell you why a little bit later.
But, again, it's like the lesser of two evils.
If you're going to, like I talk a lot about, you know, abstinence is not a solution.
You have to teach safe sex.
You can't teach abstinence, so I wish you wouldn't do that.
But if you're going to do it, that's a better way to do it.
If you need to stretch your yeast, it's better to grow it up than it is to underdose.
So if you're going to save money, better grow it up, have a stronger culture, use it twice,
instead of using half a dose two times.
>> [INDISTINCT] >> Yeah.
>> Like extrapolating from other kinds of fermentation like bread, like foolish or something like
kind of growing out that yeast in a smaller and then adding that to the larger flour,
like, it totally makes sense but like where does it break down, like where is the difference
with like flour versus...
>> Well, it's not the flour...
>> Versus the yeast.
>> Versus the flour.
>> Yeah.
>> It's the yeast.
>> So, I mean, I mean, I think it's a little bit like the, you know, the--I mean, I think
it's a little bit like the--I mean, I think it's a little bit like the--I mean, I think
and kind of growing out that yeast in a smaller amount,
adding that to the larger flour,
didn't totally make sense, but where does it break down?
Where is the difference with flour versus--
- Well, it's not the flour--
- Or is it a consistency thing?
It's just too much of a difference.
- For me, it's a consistency thing.
So with these sourdough cultures that are 100 years old,
that have just decades old cultures,
it's very valuable and it works really well in bread,
Because what we really want to do with bread is we want this transformation.
We want that gas formation.
We want the rise, which is a very small ask for yeast.
I mean, that's a primary metabolism.
The yeast, for many generations, is going to break down sugars
and produce carbon dioxide and alcohol.
You'll get those bubbles.
But what we're asking the yeast to do for these fermentations
is a secondary metabolism.
So producing the esters, the thiols, all of these compounds
that we want to give flavor,
you have a limited amount of generations
that the yeast can do that.
So in bread, we're always asking for the primary,
not that you don't get really complex flavors as well,
but the demand on those yeast is much lower.
Like just rise, give me carbon dioxide.
And here I'm like, I want esters.
And so the limited generation.
So we'll cover that also a little bit later,
but it's intuitive, but it doesn't translate.
(dog barking)
Oh, my God.
This was just to talk about the temperature again,
to make sure that the yeast that I'm adding
is not so much warmer than my coffee and shoxanthin.
In this one, you can see there's coffee in my jar,
and then we added it.
So it's the idea of being gentle,
being very thoughtful about how we're treating the yeast
so that we have a good fermentation and that they're healthy.
This is just the summary. I like this as a memorization 1 to 1, 1 to 10, 37 degrees, 20 minutes, less than 10 degrees Celsius.
And this is in your book, so...
[inaudible]
Yeah, it's your book.
So how much of the coffee do you put into the...
Enough to...
Into the mousse?
To lower the temperature. So that's a guess and check. We kind of eyeball it.
it. See, because also I don't know how much you need to drop. I don't know if you need to drop
five Celsius or if you need to drop two to be within range or if it's really hot. So you would
just add more or less until you get to that temperature. But then also leaving these time
to acclimate. So don't just drop the temperature and add it. Drop the temperature, wait, and then
And then add it.
And sometimes-- and this has happened--
that the point of adding the coffee
is to drop the temperature.
But again, if we're not paying attention
and we leave too much time, it starts to ferment really
quickly and the temperature can go back up
if you're not paying attention.
So instead of dropping it, we're increasing the temperature.
So it's just keeping an eye, having timers,
and not letting it go too long.
This is just a reminder, we talked about this a lot, but the lactic fermentation, we're
just changing the environment.
We didn't add lactic bacteria.
We are just setting the party and inviting our lactic bacteria friends.
We're inhibiting yeast and we're encouraging the lactic acid bacteria.
And usually what you can expect are some pretty flavors from this method.
One of the things that was asked was, "Okay, so what's the best way to get rid of lactic
bacteria?"
And I said, "Well, you can get rid of lactic bacteria by adding lactic acid."
And I said, "Okay, so what's the best way to get rid of lactic acid?"
And they said, "Well, you can get rid of lactic acid by adding lactic acid."
yeast and we're encouraging the lactic acid bacteria and usually what you can
expect are some pretty flavors from this method. One of the things that was asked
was okay so if it's a lactic process are we getting more lactic acid in our cup
and I can't say that because yes the lactic acid bacteria are producing more
lactic acid in our fermentation but you still have to roast it so acids are the
first thing to get degraded in our roasting so I can't say more acid here
survives to the cut. I don't know. It'll depend on your roasting style.
Anything to add?
[inaudible]
That would be very expensive.
So the yeast we can dry and send in this powdered form and you can have a lot of,
you can reduce cost that way.
The bacteria are much more delicate,
so you need to keep them in a high moisture environment.
So you would have to ship them with liquid.
We'd have to ship like a one gallon,
like re-humidified, re-hydrated solution,
which is 10 times more expensive.
So if the yeast is already very expensive,
then a bacterial culture will be 10X or 15X.
And if you dry the bacteria, it's freeze-dry,
then it has to be frozen.
So then you have to ship it with dry ice.
So either way, it's expensive,
whether you're rehydrated in water or dry ice.
So bacteria is, I love bacteria,
I just don't work with it because yeast is so much easier
to keep for three years in your backpack.
Like it's kind of the lowest common denominator.
The bacteria is great.
Maybe you live near a bacteria factory.
Maybe you live somewhere where you can have that.
- And for the yeast, I mean, can we just, I mean,
buy that bag and then keep going?
It's usually like forever, is it possible?
No?
- No, and that's a good thing,
because a lot of concerns for producers
are invasive species.
So I'm gonna bring this yeast that's kind of,
from a different country, from a different place,
and I'm gonna bring it to my mill,
and I'm gonna use it once,
and then it's gonna live forever,
and then it's gonna like contaminate.
So in a way, it's kind of like a protection.
You don't want these to live forever.
You want there to be some kind of like limiting step.
So the cynical answer is no,
because the companies wanna make money.
So if they sold you something once,
then they would never sell another bag
if that's not good for business.
But the other sense too,
is it is protecting the producer to say,
well, I don't wanna use that yeast anymore.
You stop using it.
it's not going to colonize and take over your mill and you can use something else and you can have that variability.
So both ways, you don't really want it to live forever, even if it is very inexpensive.
And again, I need a different name for this process because the lactic fermentation does have higher lactic acid,
And that is happening.
The citric, we don't want to add citric acid.
The whole point is that we don't taste the citric,
but I don't have a good name for it.
Like extreme acidification method.
You know, like it doesn't sound as easy as citric method.
- As a result of that, everyone will start using it.
- Extreme acidification.
So the whole point is to drop the acid fast
so that there is no fermentation.
because when we go from a pH of 6, 7 to 2 in a second,
that eliminates a lot of microbes
that just cannot adapt that quickly
to that extreme acidification.
So your risk of fermentation is much lower.
It's higher with the juice
because you still have all of that sugar
that you brought in from the citrus.
So if you leave it long enough,
you may still have a fermentation that starts,
a decomposition that starts.
But that's not what I'm going for.
I'm going for no effect.
I'm going for naked coffee.
I just wanna see what influence I have from the variety
or my growing practices,
or maybe changes that we're doing in the field.
Can we taste more of the nutrition?
Can we taste the difference in the shape,
trees that we're growing?
Something like that,
where process is not influencing for better or worse.
I recommend this for producers as just like,
your control. What does our coffee look like? Just do a small batch and just get an idea of what does
our tabby taste like, what does our caffeine taste like with nothing. Just to know. And because you
can do it in such a small quantity, it's not, and it's so fast. You're not losing a lot of time
to gain some of that insight. Yeah.
Would there be any baggage to soaking it, let's say, six to ten hours after washing this?
Like, you know, you bring your eggs and then you're...
Soaking it in like clean water?
Yeah.
So the soaking in clean water would help you in terms of,
if there is any influence of the citric,
to even get it a little bit more clean.
There's also an effect of soaking
where some chlorogenic acid can come out.
So maybe you can reduce your caffeine a little bit.
And the other potential danger is
you're going to be pulling out sugars.
So the glucose and the fructose will be coming out
in that sense. You could be losing some of those building blocks. So a little bit of a double-edged
sword. Maybe it's not enough to make a difference and maybe it's better to have that clean.
Experiment. So you do the citric right away, wash it, and then try another one something six hours
or 12 hours. And taste those side by side. So this one is mainly if you receive the cherries
the pulpit and wash it, you don't need to do this.
A normal producer.
- No, you don't need to do this.
This is not necessary.
This is just like a tool in your toolbox.
We were talking with Valeria when she had a day
where they just had so much cherry cob
and they couldn't process it
and they didn't have enough fermentation tanks
and they didn't have space.
This is a way where you can avoid defects
because if you leave the coffee in the cherry
sitting on a truck until you can get to it
tomorrow, the next day, maybe nobody showed up.
don't have any people to help you process it. This can help you save the coffee, which
is your question. Tell us what happened.
In the middle of pulping we had a power cut.
They had a power cut, their power went out in the middle of pulping.
Yeah. I saved half of it and gave away the other half.
So he had his coffee, his power went out, and then he was afraid the coffee was going
to spoil, so he gave it to a neighbor, right?
One of my workers.
One of his workers.
So in this case, Cecil was worried about the quality of his coffee.
My power's out, I can't process it, it's going to go bad.
So he gave it away.
So it was a missed opportunity for that coffee.
So this gives you a little bit of that wiggle room.
Or just soaking it in water. Something like that.
So it's something that you can pull out in an emergency.
It's something that you can see as a beginning of what does my variety taste like.
like, or it could let you know, maybe I want to buy an eco pulper.
Maybe I do want a machine that can do this for me.
And before you spend $10,000 on a machine, just try this and see if I like it.
Because one of the things that's happened is eco pulpers have become this like
very controversial piece of equipment.
So eco pulpers in Costa Rica, almost all of their production has moved because
they're very environmentally friendly.
coffee production uses a lot of water.
And so they said, let's eliminate water as much as we can
and we're gonna use this eco-pulver
and we're gonna eliminate the fermentation.
And their coffee improved, their coffee is excellent.
So all like Costa Rican coffee producers
say eco-pulvers are the best thing
that's ever happened to coffee.
And then they were like touting its like benefits
and a lot of Latin producers
who traditionally knew of fermentation
bought these eco-pulvers.
And they said, my coffee was excellent
and now my coffee is boring and flat
and my quality has gone down.
They said eco-pulpers are the worst thing
that has ever happened.
You go to a lot of Latin producers
and the eco-pulper is collecting dust in the corner,
this expensive piece of equipment
that they just don't use anymore.
And so you have these two countries, two producers
that swear that the best thing that ever happened,
the worst thing that ever happened,
and they're both completely correct.
They're both actually correct.
Because in Costa Rica, they use a lot of recycled water.
So they were having this highly microbially charged water
washing their coffee so that when they cut out
the fermentation step, they eliminated defects.
Their coffee got better and cleaner.
But in a lot of Latin countries, we have so much water
we don't know what to do with.
There's so much water that we're drowning.
And so when they stopped doing that fermentation,
they didn't need to save water at that point.
Like it was just sort of like,
I don't know what to do with the extra water.
So a lot of times the coffee was washed several times.
And then when they limited the fermentation,
their coffee was less complex, less interesting, less--
I don't know, lower quality to them.
So it depends on in what situation
you introduce this machine.
It can either really improve your coffee
or be the worst thing that you've ever purchased.
So it's still not like--
I guess a lot of people still don't realize
that there's that opportunity.
And they're still like, EcoFulbridge
are the best for water saving.
Yes, but if you are in a situation where you can't sell your coffee for more and differentiate it, eco-pulpers are somewhat of an advantage.
So it was the recycled water that made the real difference for Costa Rica and the rest of Latin America?
I can't say for sure, but that's my guess.
My experience seeing, working in Costa Rica, going to other countries, they have a much stronger emphasis,
a much stronger, like, kind of governmental support to say, "This is how we're really--want
to recycle this water, we really want to be conscious about this, everybody use recycled
water," and kind of like a countrywide, like, unspoken mandate, like, "This is how we process
coffee here." Make sense?
>> Would it, in theory, at least, in Costa Rica, by any--if there was accessible water
and it wasn't being recycled into good fermentation,
that it could be even better than the eco-pulp?
Or are there some areas that are just going to--the eco-pulp will just be better than that or what?
Like...
I don't think...
I don't think no fermentation is ever better than a good fermentation.
A good fermentation has a chance to add complexity,
and no fermentation, well, you're kind of giving that up.
But definitely no fermentation is better than a bad fermentation.
So it's sort of like that kind of starting material.
So I don't think it will ever be better if you're managing it well.
I've got a question about the sesame seeds.
Because you said that the powder went out and we didn't have a powder,
so if we had a powder, which is not manpower, is there a way to make the sesame process?
So what he could have done is soaked it in cool water to preserve the cherries and then
maybe the next morning, so you would need the pulper to start working.
So it would buy you time, but because you've already had the coffee soaking in the cherry
or macerating in the cherry for so long, you may not then want to do an even longer fermentation
afterwards.
So the short could still help you to kind of recover some of that time.
So let's say, unfortunately, maybe the coffee stayed 48 hours in its cherry because the
power didn't come back for two days, but then if you do no fermentation, if you cut it off
there, your total time is still 48, versus if you wait the 48 and then you have another
three-day fermentation, now you're going on five days and you have more opportunity for
defects or for something to go wrong.
So yes, you still wouldn't use a citric on the cherries, but it could still help you.
So like, to kind of like, break like, you're gonna crash and then you just right at the
end kind of come back.
Yeah.
So this kind of gets to this point of like, well what's better?
Eco-pulp work, fermentation, no fermentation.
And then the question is, what is the role of processing?
What is the point?
And not everybody in the Spanish group knows what James Hoffman is, but I assume most of
So most of the people here have heard of James Hoffman as a very influential person, coffee personality.
And so
this is a quote of his that I found.
So I still believe that creation of quality ends the moment you pick a coffee and that every single step afterward is about preservation and transparency.
Except the natural process. So let's just stick on this preservation and transparency. So I have like the cherry like in ice.
So this is a very common view
that also related to what producers were being told.
So producers were being told,
we talked about this yesterday,
process as quickly as possible, get out of the way,
all you can do is ruin the coffee.
Processing only ruins it, you can't make it better.
You can either like stabilize or ruin it.
But you can't add value.
So this was what producers were being told.
And this is what a lot of roasters
and racists and influential people still think,
that coffee should be transparent,
that we should just taste the terroir
taste the varieties. And I really disagree with this because it's very
unempowering and it's also technically incorrect. But James said this 10 years
ago at this point. So I wrote to him and I said, "Do you still
believe this? Do you still think that this is a fair point of view?" And he
wrote me back in an email and he said, "It's probably a fair quote. Naturals
have evolved but they still do paint a particular layer of flavor over any
coffee that belongs to the processed very evidently. In rare occasions, some
naturals don't taste very naturally, but that is so rare. So I think this is
important to bring up. Again, my accompanying picture is this painting of
flavor, this idea that processing is separate from coffee, that there is pure
coffee and that processing is this thing that we're covering, that we're masking,
that we're putting on top of the cherry.
And I think this is a really common view,
but I think this is very false.
Because it's like, as a human,
I can't separate my human cells from my bacteria cells.
I am more bacteria than I am human.
Separating those doesn't even make sense.
You don't even need to do that.
Like, we are one system.
So for me, the coffee and the processing are a unit.
It's not extrinsic.
It's not external flavor that producers are painting on top.
- And he doesn't mention washed coffees in there?
- No, he really focuses on the naturals,
I think, from the previous quote,
but it's still this idea that flavor is on the outside,
and that washed is a superior method
because it's even less strong, like it's more clean.
I like that's a big descriptor, it's clean.
So washed coffees have that value of like,
they're better because you don't taste the process.
better because the producer is more invisible.
You just stop it there and watch it and consume it.
Exactly.
So finally, last year, I finally got him to change his mind.
So he said, so this is not being driven by consumers or producers, right?
So he's realizing that this is kind of an outside-in trend.
And he says he was anti a lot of them, adulterating coffee and not tasting the purity.
based on impurity, he had that idea, he says "I've had my mind changed on this,"
anything that makes a producer's copy more valuable to them is a good thing.
So this has been, for somebody like him to say this, I think is a really big win for producers,
because the message has still been, be transparent, be pure, you're adulterating,
you're changing all of these things. And so I'm just very proud of that. Yeah.
Do you have any insight or ideas onto the original quote?
Like, the key thing that interests me is "I believed."
Like, that belief.
Where are these beliefs-- like, beyond just, like, is it just you?
Is it, like, where-- besides the textbook description of saying that that was the case not that long ago,
but, like, why do people just randomly believe this, like, with no evidence?
or are they leaning on some false evidence?
- I think part of it has been because
the role of the producer has been so invisible,
so you just don't realize how much work
goes into transforming coffee,
so that you think that it's just like,
well, a lot of people don't think of how their coffee gets
so that in the morning anyway,
there's just coffee here.
But then if they see the coffee farm,
then you see the farm, and the farm's elevated,
and all of the show and the barista
and the latte art is elevated.
But there's this like, big middle, like, mystery.
And so I think it's mostly because it hasn't been visible
and we don't know we need to care about it.
And then we just think farm to cub.
I mean, that's the phrasing, farm to cub.
So it just goes from here to here, and that's pure.
The best we can accomplish is this, like,
making that distance as small as possible,
ignoring this, like, huge middle.
So I don't think it's necessarily on purpose.
It's like, we don't know what we don't know.
And so we've never seen this part,
and why should we think that it's important?
So I think it's part of that,
of just, we can't see our blind spots.
- Isn't that kind of a dangerous thing
that happens a lot in coffee?
It feels like a lot of times beliefs and ideas are shared
without, as you're saying, without understanding it.
Like, and saying things are truths
when they're obviously not.
- Yeah, and I have a lot of trouble with this
because I'm trying to share things
from a scientific perspective,
but I still have a lot of opinions.
So I try to be really clear, you know,
this is a fact that has been proven
by a lot of other people,
and then this is my opinion of these things.
'Cause I still have a lot of that,
like my beliefs based on these things.
So I think that's part of it too,
is I think it's an error to think
that science is infallible,
and that science is also like without belief.
Like in science, I have a lot of beliefs within science.
So it's another system of belief.
So I think even that way,
it's not that there's these beliefs,
and then there's science.
It's just a different set of beliefs.
So--
- Theories.
(laughs)
- Yeah.
So I don't think that there's like this absolute truth.
I think that a lot of it does,
I mean, that's why my favorite word is context.
How do we talk about it within the context of this country
or within the context of, you know,
these people with these backgrounds
or within the context of just this group?
So I think context gives us a lot of that foundation.
But I think we can get very, we're so tempting,
so uncomfortable to be insecure.
So it's so tempting to find something
that you can grab onto and say,
"This is truth, and I am on the right side of it."
And it's hard to say, "I don't know."
So, that's what I think.
- That's like a human problem.
- That's a human problem, not a copy problem.
- It's like a society problem.
Copy, we're just really good at it.
Yeah.
Just passionate, vocal people.
That's a good point.
So this slide is just to show you
that in one gram of pulled coffee--
this drawing of a hand is like maybe 15 grams.
But in the study that they did, it
was only one gram, a tiny amount, of pulled coffee.
And they found almost a million different types of bacteria,
200 types of yeast and 100 different fungi.
Which is just to say that some of the way
that we kind of talk about coffee incorrectly
when we're processing is we say, that's the one with yeast,
and then the other one's the one without yeast.
This one has it and this one doesn't.
We're very simplistic.
Instead of realizing that this inoculum is coming
and all of this stuff is there, all of the bacteria is there,
all of the yeast is already there,
just kind of waiting for an opportunity
to expand, to reproduce, or it just sort of gets starved out.
So it's all already there.
So I like to say, my favorite wording is more saying
like the inoculated one and the wild one.
The controlled one or the uncontrolled one.
We don't say yeast and no yeast, 'cause it's there.
- So is inoculated and controlled are synonymous
and wild and uncontrolled would be synonymous?
- Not necessarily, because, so yes,
It's sort of like a square is a rectangle,
but a rectangle is not a square.
So if we're inoculating, we're controlling it.
But with the lactic, we're controlling it.
We're controlling the environment
that we didn't inoculate.
Meaning we changed something, we're monitoring,
but we didn't inoculate.
So yes, inoculation is also control.
But control is not always--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
But it can be inoculated.
>> Yes, we could. We could. You could inoculate at any moment. You can inoculate a cherry,
after pulping, you could leave it 24 hours, 48 hours, and then inoculate. Yes. You can
do it at any stage. >> I... Oh, sorry.
>> And then, Joey. >> I mean, what method that they can identify
So many bacteria like this, it's kind of difficult to identify all of these tiny gram of coffee.
No, I mean, you can, tiny gram is actually a pretty big sample in the world of biology.
You can find a lot, I mean in a gram of soil, you can find even more diversity than we can find in coffee.
So you mean, they use, I mean, like PCR technique or in kind of, I mean,
elaborate with the technique to identify all these microbes?
I mean, in this paper, it's just one way.
I don't remember the technique that they use necessarily in this paper,
but the analysis usually that I've seen is either plating.
So you can take some of the sample, put it in like an auger, petri dish,
plate it out, grow up the colonies, isolate them,
and then get DNA of what these colonies are.
[INAUDIBLE]
What is the type of yeast that can have a lot of work?
Yes.
[INAUDIBLE]
It has a lot of work.
It's not something that just anybody can do.
You're not going to do that with every batch of your house.
No.
OK.
Sorry, Joey, your question?
Oh.
For natural coffees, if all of the microbial activity is on the outside of the cherry,
how does that yeast inoculation process work?
How would it affect the seed?
It's very reduced because you have microbes on the outside, food on the inside,
so it's a much more limited interaction.
You would need some moisture.
still need some moisture the way that we've submerged the coffee to have that activity.
So too dry reduces that activity. So I don't have a good answer on how it happens.
But it somehow penetrates the outside of the cherry?
The yeast is too large to penetrate all of these tissue layers and eventually get to the seed.
And that's not our goal. We don't want the yeast to get into the seed.
the yeast metabolism, the metabolites that are way smaller that can actually...
They always get into the seed.
They can. Again, in a cherry select scenario, it's much reduced and more limited because you have all of these layers to get through to eventually get into the seed.
Yeah.
Julie, should we talk about your method of... like, how... you inoculate your cherries.
Yeah, so I pretty much follow everything Lucia does, except I skip the pulping stage altogether,
so I leave the fruit whole, and then just let the whole fruit ferment inside essentially like a tank.
It pretty much depends on the altitude and all these things, there's no set time, of course,
fermentation is about what's happening.
But for our farm, we found that 72 hours is a really nice sweet spot.
We don't go over 96 hours.
We've had like poultry cherries as low as 48 hours turn out still pretty clean and nice.
But basically it's a fermented natural that's submerged in water.
So how can you inoculate and leave it for three days instead of just going direct to patio or direct to drying?
I think it's an opportunity to reduce the amount of sugars there.
And I think by reducing the sugars to fermentation, you might be also reducing your risk for contamination.
It also speeds up germination.
And so far we've found that we get a lot of pretty ester flavors that are really nice and clean, almost like a washed coffee.
So it's a really nice cupping for us.
Do you use that same yeast?
I've been using a lot of different yeasts.
But I did try wild-caught babies and they are very nice, but I have some of these that I also prefer.
And I would think, which ones have you used?
Like the 4-marina or Red Star?
No, actually other Scotlabs. So the one of the coffee that I brought is called Bee Foods.
Bee Foods is an IOC. But yeah, I got it through Scotlabs, so it's just another one of their offerings that was pretty wonderful.
These yeasts are very specialized and pretty expensive.
The way that you're using it makes me think it's more, because of the other conversation we had about the lower microbial load,
you may want to have something to bring it up so that you have that decrease in substrate so that you have an easier drying time and less competition.
I feel like the yeast is not able to have as strong of an impact positively as much as it's kind of giving you that insurance.
It's more preventing defects, preventing issues, which kind of any cheaper yeast would do.
Have you tried like red yeast?
Yeah, I didn't like the red yeast.
So they do have an impact, of course.
I've tried eight different yeasts so far, and each one has a different impact on the flavor and the flavor of the cup.
just keeping every single thing and just changing the yeast
is that an act?
So I think-- I don't know for sure,
but I think possibly that the different yeast are actually
having different flavor implications too.
So maybe something is--
[INAUDIBLE]
--drastically.
I could show you the cupping notes,
but some are really tropical fruity.
Others are very light.
But are you finding any cups for differences?
Is it mostly attributes?
Yeah, cut score differences for sure.
I've been doing cupping with OCR and they've been giving me results just so I'm not biased.
And so they've been going from like 85-ish up to an 88, depending on the specific yeast.
So going 48, I would expect.
78.
So I think the key to a process is the submerged for the time that it's in contact with yeast.
Some people just put spray of the yeast on the dried cherries, which I think has much
less of an impact.
Again, it's more of a bio-control, so it's sort of like reserving.
I have a table for 10, and I'm reserving these seats, and even though people come to the
restaurant, you can't sit here.
So if this yeast is dried on the surface, then it's sort of taking up that spot.
And again, it's not necessarily adding, it's just not letting anybody else colonize and take over.
And we've seen some of these naturals that get all the mold, they get fuzzy and white.
So anywhere where there is yeast, you have the competition to have white mold.
So that's very helpful.
Anything about Koji?
I don't work with koji, but I think that I've tried coffees that have had it and they're delicious.
This is El Verkado, right?
Yes, I think that's where it came from. Phoenix roasted it in Ohio.
I don't remember who it was, but it might have been El Verkado.
So I think it's a very valid method. It's obviously produced some really delicious coffee.
The koji spores can be even more expensive than they used for the bacteria.
So sourcing can be a bit of a limitation
But if you're able to get the scores and you're able to regenerate them
That is something that you can keep a culture much longer
It's not like you have to keep buying, keep buying, keep buying. You just have to get the first starter scores.
Well, they will eventually age out for a while, especially for some of the Japanese brands.
Like they will start to have contamination.
I mean, I feel like you could use for a season, for like your four months of harvest.
Oh yeah, like it's just trying to continue on forever with it.
But that's also using it the way that it's kind of traditionally used, where it's like,
like the commercial sized packets can then be cut with like rice flour,
and then trying to reuse that indefinitely has issues just because it's produced in facilities where they're
Yeah, super sterile. Yeah, it's like it's just it's not
As for Joseph everywhere and there are other all different kinds and so the contamination
So that's yeah one of the challenges the longer you try to keep a culture the more contamination like if you're
It's not diluted because it's still like a strong culture, but you're sort of diluting the purity because you have all this contamination
overall of these generations
That's a barrier to consistency.
But again, with sourdough, all we want,
we want the rise, we want the bubbles.
That's an easy ask for these.
But if you cut the koji, like, talk about cost-effectiveness,
it's actually cheaper than what you showed today.
For the quantity, how much needs to be evaporated
for coffee or whatever.
So I think Koji's going to be way more of an option
for producers moving forward.
I think there's a lot of good protocols
and really good results.
I just don't happen to work with it.
But I-- coffees are good.
So this is a study that I like to really make sure
that really breaks that paradigm of what
James was talking about in terms of our yeast diversity.
And so when we're looking here, first of all,
we have this really tiny cluster of the yeast in wine
versus coffee versus pecan.
So this was, I think, much more of a plated study,
where they took the green coffee,
plated it in a petri dish, and grew up the colonies,
and they were able to identify them.
Because she didn't go to origin to get fresh cherries
or swab them into pieces.
green coffee was just sent to her. So this was all of the yeast that survived, just the
processing. So there's still a huge amount of diversity. So coffee is the one in red.
So there's still a huge amount of diversity of the microbes that were found on dried green
coffee that was sent. This is not fresh cherry, which is way more fascinating. There's so
much still left over.
Would that be the same as anything that's in Ben Roasts?
Or is it still at a higher hydration, or fully dried,
the same for Export?
I feel like for-- because she wasn't necessarily asking
for these samples for the study.
She was just like, what samples are available?
I think that they were dried to regular 11% levels for Export.
These could just be taken and roasted and turned
into our regular coffee.
So that's really cool that they were
able to get this much information from these samples.
So the point is, the wine, the blue cluster,
is very tight, which means there's
less diversity in these wine yeasts
than there are in these other products.
But we know that there's not a lack of flavor diversity
in wine.
So I think a lot of times, producers
have this fear that if I use the same yeast as many of you,
we all start using the same yeast.
All coffee is going to taste exactly the same,
And it's going to lose the preciousness,
and it's going to lose its identity.
And I don't think we need to be afraid of that.
I don't think that that's something
that needs to be such a concern, because there's still
so much influence.
It's kind of giving the yeast too much credit.
It's not that powerful to make coffee
homogenous across the board.
And even in situations with wine,
where you're using the same varietal,
using the same sauvignon blanc, and you're
using the exact same yeast to ferment it,
there's still a huge variation of flavor in Sauvignon Blancs
from region to region or from year to year
if you're still using the same yeast on the same variety.
So, and yeast is not that powerful.
You don't need to be afraid of that.
- And also because in wine,
when we're talking about before you sterilize, it's called?
- Yeah, and you sterilize before.
- So, probably you have more control of the yeast.
- Exactly. - In coffee, no.
- Exactly.
So that contributes very much to this cluster
being really tight in line.
We're first eliminating our competition,
and then we're inoculating.
But we still have a huge variety of flavor.
And in coffee, we're usually not sterilizing, even if we are--
Could you sterilize coffee?
Yes.
Some people are.
Diego sterilizes his coffee.
All of them?
All of them.
Yes.
So how do you do that?
What is that process?
You can sterilize in many different ways.
So we've talked about using potassium metamisulfite to sterilize,
you can use sulfur dioxide, you can use ozonated water.
And you do that at any point in the process?
Well, the sooner you do it, the more impactful it is.
So if you're going to bring cherries,
and then run it through your pulper,
and then go in the tank, and then sterilize,
it's sort of like a missed opportunity.
Sterilize as soon as possible.
So you're saying the cherry?
Yes.
You're going to do everything before the pulper?
How do you choose what you're sterilizing with?
Whatever's most available.
I mean, all things being equal, my favorite method is ozone.
I love ozone for cleaning equipment.
I love-- I love ozone.
What is ozone?
It's an expensive-- can be kind of an expensive machine.
But as far as I understand it, you're
running water and electricity so that you can add that extra
oxygen to H2O so that you have O3s,
so you have that really strong--
well, strong oxidizer.
So you have this potential because you're
creating this thing that doesn't really want to be connected.
So that when you're applying it to organisms,
that oxygen is much more available, much more
likely to react and oxidize or eliminate the competition.
So I like-- and then once it's kind of used up,
because water-- we have a chemist here.
[LAUGHTER]
Can I explain?
[INAUDIBLE]
Go for it.
[LAUGHTER]
So it's a really nice method because it just
dissipates into water.
And so after you have that use of your microbes.
But it is an expensive machine, so it's not readily
available in lots of places.
But if you can, I love it.
We can just DIY that tomorrow.
Get our shower heads.
[LAUGHTER]
Electricity is off.
But I don't recommend sterilizing
unless you have a problem.
It can be an expensive step.
It's an additional step.
If your coffee's fine, don't bother with the sexual stuff
until you have a problem.
And then again, we're getting some defects.
We're getting some inconsistencies.
maybe start to sterilize and try that and then guess and check and then how does that work and
then go back to the dry board. Maybe that wasn't the problem, maybe that wasn't it, but it's really
like low-hanging fruit. It's like an easy thing to start doing after you have a problem. So in
troubleshooting, that's not where I start.
I mean, the sterilizing? How to do that? I mean, you do it.
In the pulping step, or sorry, in the floating step.
So it's something that you could put in your water.
Oh, we also talked about salt.
So we added salt to encourage the bacteria,
but higher concentrations of salt
are much more selective, much more sterilizing.
So in our floating water, we could add salt to our floating.
And so it would bring down the charge,
it would help with the buoyancy to like separate also.
It's a good idea.
Salting your pulp.
- And you use light?
like infralight, something like that, infrared.
- They do that in Hawaii.
There's some places in Hawaii that do that.
- Yeah, there's some places that use UV treated water
for kind of their process,
so to just kind of clean up their water a little bit more.
I don't know if they're really using.
And then you can wash your tanks with that water
or fermentable water.
- To connect it to the Panagoche.
- Huh?
- Which will connect the UV?
- Yeah, UV water.
It's just that it's been processed since the cherry's been taken with a small amount of water.
So just use this water while the cherry's still...
Oh yeah, using that water while you're being...
So yeah, that's another option too is looking at...
Anytime you're adding water to cherry, whether you're floating, whether you're moving it to the pulver,
whether you're filling up your fermentation tank,
each one of those is an opportunity to potentially sterilize your coffee with one of these methods.
And when I read Diego's protocols, he sterilizes like three times.
[laughs]
I...
I'm trying to think if I have one of his methods
that's so long-mixed and said that maybe we can go do together.
But I'm not supposed to have it, so you guys can't tell on me.
[laughs]
You have to stop recording. Yeah.
Stop recording? I really want to know.
Well, we'll do that. We'll do that. I'll find it.
because it is really fascinating to see like all of the options.
Yeah, because I mean the most curious thing is I think in the last years the
flavors went a bit you know in intensity a bit down but still when it's fresh it's really
repeatable. So for example lychee I mean last four years we have the same lychee at the beginning but
it felt like four or five years ago it was like a bit more intense for a long time
And nowadays it feels like, okay, and this is also feedback from a lot of roasters, like, three for one.
It's gone.
And you pay like three for one for a free ticket.
Yeah.
So that's pretty much...
I'll show you the protocol and we'll go through why I think that is.
I was, I'm, I'm really glad you said that because when I read the protocols I'm like,
"These copies cannot last more than three months."
I'm like, "I don't understand it."
And then I asked one of the roasters, Dave Crankhouse, who bought it, and he's like,
"No, they're lasting."
And I was like, "You're blowing my mind.
"I can't believe these coffees are lasting."
So he said he was having them eight months later,
and they were still okay.
And I was like, "I don't know how you can accomplish that."
- And what was the key part that makes you
have that idea that it would not last that long?
- I have to show you, it's three pages of processing.
So I will bring it up on the screen, maybe tomorrow.
Yeah, if we can get through this.
- 'Cause you're just doing so much to the coffee
over and over that you're degrading, essentially,
the integrity of the seed?
- That's what I believe.
Like the process is so intensive that each time
you're just compromising the integrity,
- The cell-- - Like a battery ramp.
- Yeah, the integrity of the cellular structure
by just constantly cleaning up this coffee.
It's getting punched in the face.
- It's like a dye in your face.
(laughing)
- So this is, Dr. Maca, an example of a plate,
of a peachy plate, where you just kind of like
take the coffee, smash it on the plate, grow up colonies, try to isolate them, then get their DNA.
So the most important finding, and again, so this is all to go back to what James was saying about,
or that Paul's belief, that coffee processing is like outside of coffee, that it's extrinsic,
that it's this additional makeup that we're putting on top of it.
And for me this is really important seeing that the yeast, the microbes that are found on coffee and cacao are not crop specific.
It's not about only this is found in cacao, only this is found in coffee.
It has to do with the location, it has to do with the space, it has to do with Colombia cacao and Colombia coffee have similar microbes.
And Mexican coffee and Mexican cacao have very similar microbes but different from each other.
So it's about the place because the way that these microbes got to the place is the people.
We carried them.
We people moved from place to place and the pickers that are picking cacao, the pickers
that are picking coffee, and picking papaya, and picking all of these things, we're all
touching everything and we're carrying these microbes with them.
So for me, the story of coffee flavor is not just the variety, it's the microbes that came
with it and the people that brought those microbes.
So for me, it's impossible to separate out and say,
this is flavor of pure coffee, and this is processing,
and these two things are separate.
It's like they're all, I think, connected,
which gives the producer much more of a role,
much more of a place in the story of coffee,
mostly which is like, seed to cup,
and forget everything else, right?
So this is kind of a reminder
that the starting population already has,
It already has everything it needs. It already has all of the yeast and bacteria.
And when we change the environment, meaning we change the temperature,
we add more moisture or we dry it out more, we change the pH.
When we change the environment, we sort of open these windows, these opportunities
for one microbe to dominate and for another to dominate or another one to starve out.
So it's all just kind of choosing how we manipulate this environment
to figure out what we want to pop, what we want to stand out.
So just reinforcing that microbial flavors
are not painted on, they're not extrinsic,
they're not this outside thing.
They're integral to coffee's flavor, they're very important.
Microbes to coffee, this fermentation,
is not this extra thing.
I just wanna go a little bit further
'cause I was able to go a little bit further
with the Spanish group, so we're all on the same page.
I'm just gonna do like two more slides
because this really relates to why I process coffee
the way that I do.
'Cause I think about, I wanna get to my seed
and the outside, my cascara, my peel,
is my microbe carriers.
That's where my microbes are coming in.
And my mucilage, this thick layer, is my food and my fuel.
But then my parchment and my silver skin are these barriers.
So like, I want to get the microbes on the outside
to connect with the fuel and get all the way into the seed.
So for me, anything that we're doing in cherry
is kind of starting behind the like starting line.
It's like, I want to get here as quickly as possible
so if I have less tissue layers,
I can have an impact sooner.
But in situations like with yusasso
where you didn't have a pulp bar
and you weren't able to start,
keeping it in cherry is preserving it,
is giving you much more of a buffer to be able to kind of manage time or power outages or labor
shortages or something like that. So keeping it in cherry is more of a protective. So it has its
purpose, but it's hard to be like protective and maximizing flavor. It's hard to do both.
And we've already talked about this, about microbes change with maturity.
So having the more ripe cherries, with overripe, having more of a microbial load,
but actually less sugar. So one of the things that we saw today, this is a little sample.
I mean, you brought this, right? Yeah.
Mac brought this sample. So when we have all of these coffees that were white,
they're kind of oxidizing and getting darker now, but we saw all of these that were white.
So all of these have lost their parchment. All of these have been kind of damaged by the machine
during pulping and a lot of that has to do with the overripe cherries because the overripe
consumed that mucilage layer and so the mucilage layer was that protection, was that buffer, so
then when it went through the machine it didn't have like its protective casing and so it was
much easier to break down this parchment. It's also true that these happen a lot when it under
ripes for the same reason. If you're a green coffee, you haven't developed much sweetness,
you haven't developed that layer of softness, so again you don't have that protection. So in both
cases the same thing happens. If you're not ripe enough, you didn't develop your mucilage layer.
If you're too ripe, it was already eaten by something else, so when you go through the
the machine you have a lot of damage. And so this is why I don't recommend keeping your
coffee in cherry and then pulping it. So what Julie's doing, that's what I recommend. She
has her cherry, she's fermenting her cherry, she's doing it in water, and then she maintains
in cherry. She stays in cherry the whole time until it's time to hold the coffee and get
the green out. If you do it the way most producers aren't sure, they're just copying methods,
they'll do a cherry fermentation for three days, pulp the coffee, put it in the tank
and do something else. So what you've done is increased the potential of these because
for three days it was consuming that layer, then you run it through the pulper, you damage
most of your coffee that didn't need to be damaged, and now that's a loss. And so I sort
like pick a light. Like if you're gonna do it in cherry, stay in cherry. And if you're gonna pulp
the coffee and do a fermentation, pulp earlier. Pulp sooner. Yeah? One interesting thing though
is with Robusta, it actually is really helpful because the it's so thick and it's actually
really hard to pulp Robusta fresh off the tree. But fermenting it in the cherry for a while first
softens it and actually makes it a lot easier to pump. But yeah with the Rabita you're absolutely
you get so many more defects. I mean we do it for some just because I feel it's worth it to
get what we get from it but it's just you have to write off another five percent as defects and
you're gonna do a lot of sorting. So if you have a laver or if you've tried it and you get good
good results and you have a market for it. If you know this coffee has a home,
then you can do it. But I see so many producers doing this blind, hoping to get
a customer, and then if that customer doesn't come, they've ruined a lot of
coffee and added a lot of work. And now, I mean, that's one of the like difficult
parts with these processes is that they really affect the color of the parchment,
Right, so we saw some of the, even in this 12-hour overnight, some of the coffees were
already getting kind of pinkish, kind of orangey, and some of them were very white.
So first of all, that's like a, you know that these two are different.
These are not homogenous coffee seeds.
And because in these countries the tradition is more commercial coffee, you just produce
coffee, you sell it to the co-op, and you move on.
And they can't cup the coffees.
They don't know what they taste like.
So visual cues are really important.
So if the coffee looks a certain way,
they think it probably tastes a certain way,
and they'll give you a certain price.
But I have heard so many sad stories from producers
who tried an anaerobic fermentation,
who tried a carbonic maceration.
It stained their parchment.
The flavor was probably great.
It might've been an 86, but no one's cupping that coffee.
So it looks stained.
So they had to sell it as pasilla, as segunda,
as like lower inferior quality, as like 79 point coffee,
because no one's gonna take the time to taste it.
And because it looks visually worse.
So when I was working,
I did a project with TechnoServe like 2015,
and we did this yeast,
and this yeast process with the SEMA,
and the TechnoServe guys were so pumped.
They loved the process, and they haven't even tasted it.
Like we've just done like a 36 hour fermentation,
but because the parchment came out so white,
they called it huesos, like bones.
It was so bone white that they were just like,
we can just sell this on looks.
We don't even have to, this can not taste any different,
but because it's so pretty,
we can sell this coffee for more.
And that was enough for them.
So it's one of those like double-edged swords
where if you have the market
and we already have the buyers, that's great,
But it's very risky to go in that direction,
change the color of your parchment,
and then maybe not have a place to sell it.
So that can be really tough.
The last point.
- I'm going by because I have a question here.
So you say in the cherry we have the--
- The yeast and the bacteria.
- Yeah, the bacteria.
But when with the pulp, so we mainly take it out.
when the bacteria or the yeast pass through the mossy.
- Well, not necessarily,
because if you saw the way the pulper works,
so it's like this hopper,
and the cherries are rolling around in it,
and as they're rolling around,
they're contaminating,
they're depositing their microbes on the surface.
- By any way you remove.
- And then your cold coffee's going through there too.
So your cold coffee is still getting like bathed in it.
So it's lower, it's a lower charge
'cause you don't have all the cascara,
but you don't have like a perfect separation.
you're still getting that mixture.
So there's still a lot of microbes in my pulped coffee,
even if I take the cascara away.
They're still there.
This is just to go back to the idea of the tablets.
I was also mentioning, if you don't want to make a tablet,
just do it by weight.
100 grams of coffee, separate out by color,
and then weigh the dark ones and the green ones.
It's another easier way.
The tablet just is fun.
It looks pretty.
Yeah, it looks pretty.
It makes good pictures.
But you could also just do it with a scale and you just grab a cup, 100 grams, and do
that exercise.
So no excuses, no excuses to not do your screening.
So this is another study I really like because it talks a little bit about my concern with
so much of what's happening in specialty is that we talk about the infrastructure.
So we think that a natural tastes like a natural because I put it on a raised bed
and a wash tastes like a wash because it's in a tank and we think there's something magical about
the equipment and it's happening a lot with carbonic laceration. There's something special
about the tank. If I get this stainless steel tank with these valves like this tank is the
thing that's going to give my coffee the flavor. It's the tank, it's the beds, it's the the
containers. But it's not about the containers, it's about the microbes that are found in those
environments. So this is a study that they did, uh 2006? 2008. And they took a dry process coffee,
so a natural coffee, from zero to 22 days on raised beds, and every couple of days they were
we're doing this DNA ID of what are the microbes that are found on the surface of this product.
And in the first four days, they saw that, okay, so here in this graph, what we have
is the pH is going down. As the pH goes down, our moisture also goes down. That's water
activity. Water activity, moisture content, it's going down. And days are on the x-axis.
As more time passes, it gets more acidic and more dry.
We know this.
We know coffee.
That's why we do it.
We dry it so that the moisture will go down over time and as there's more contact, there's
more acidity.
So what they found is that in the beginning, in the first four days, 96% of the microbes
were bacteria.
It was dominated by bacteria.
But as time was passing, as it was getting more acidic and less moisture, it flipped
And then it was dominated by yeast.
Because yeast have, again, a more developed cell wall,
each generation, they get a little stronger,
a little tougher, they adapt better
to the more harsh conditions.
More acid is harsher.
Less moisture is a difficult condition
if they want more moisture.
So the yeast can survive.
So the yeast survived.
If you look at the 22 days, 11% moisture,
they still found several species of yeast that were present.
This is why Amy Dudley in Washington
in that previous study was able to find all of this diversity
in coffee.
Because even at 11%, even dried coffee,
there was still all of this range of yeast.
At that point, the bacteria that needed the moisture,
there wasn't that much bacteria that they could find.
So yeast is, again, a more robust, bigger target.
So what's interesting about this, what this tells us
is that a natural tastes like a natural,
not because it's on a raised bed,
but because it's a yeast dominated process
and it's this particular, these particular species of yeast
that are dominating the process.
So if we can take these yeasts and put them in a tank,
then instead of spending 22 days to get a natural profile,
we can maybe do it in 36 hours.
And the benefit of that is, as a producer in these countries,
a lot can go wrong in 22 days.
You can lose power, your workers don't show up,
no one's ready to make the coffee, you get a storm in,
the currency is incredibly devalued,
so now you can't buy the things
that you thought you were gonna value.
A lot can happen in a month.
And to get that flavor profile in less time,
because we know what microbes are creating this flavor,
that gives a producer a lot of flexibility,
lot more options. And so this is the idea of making a washed coffee taste like a natural,
but what Julie was telling us was the opposite. She's doing a natural because for her it's
important to not use as much water, so to be conserving, and also there's a lot of labor
involved in washed coffees and equipment. You have to have a pulper, you have to have a tape,
you have to have somebody doing all this stuff. So for her a natural, a dry process, is less effort,
less flavor and less water, more in line with her philosophy, but she doesn't want the natural
traditional flavor profile. So she puts it in water, she increases that moisture so that it's
dominated by other microbes, and she's inoculating, so she gets a washed profile from a natural coffee.
So the problem with so much of specialty is that we're looking at the gear to give us the flavor
and completely ignoring the microbes that are actually giving us the flavor.
Why is doing the fermentation
with the choice drying?
Because they can live with the oxygen and also without the oxygen.
So, with the environment with the oxygen,
why they're doing the imitation, I'm just wondering.
- We will get there, there's a whole section on oxygen.
'Cause the other question was anaerobic.
And is it still an, you're asking, right?
Is it still an anaerobic if I'm opening and mixing?
If I'm mixing my tank all the time,
can I still call that an anaerobic?
There's a whole section on that coming up.
- And also it's related, like, you always hear like,
36 hours, 72 hours, it's pretty much the same concept
that you have.
It has to do, it's related with the embryo of the coffee
or why, like worldwide you always have those times,
you know?
- I, my experience is because that's just the worker times.
So it's either, like the units, it's one day
or one day and a half, or when people are available.
So there's nothing magical about 36 hours,
It's just a day and a half.
So the cherry comes in at night, usually,
and then we wait one night,
and then we process in the morning.
So it has more to do with the cycles of the sun
and when people are working than the optimal time.
The optimal time could actually be 17 hours,
but that's four in the morning and no one's gonna work,
so it doesn't matter.
We still have to wait for 7 a.m. when everybody shows up.
So it has to do with the practicalities
when people can work. Okay because others say like you go up to 72 hours the embryo of the coffee is
gonna die or something like that. Not necessarily. I don't, the embryo has a lot more influence like
with temperature so I could have a really long fermentation but if it's a lower temperature and
I'm able to preserve that embryo it's fine so it doesn't it's not time time is too short. And it's
- It's no lack of oxygen either.
- No.
- It's just temperature.
- No, it can be...
Lily, do you know what causes embryonic death?
- I've seen a lot of anaerobic, or not a lot,
I've seen some anaerobic happening, embryonic death.
I know that in kickout,
it's caused by the heat during the fermentation.
- Like that one?
- Right, in kickout, you want it to die.
- But in coffee, no.
Preferably not, yeah.
Preferably no.
How do you measure it with the--
with the-- sorry.
Viability-- you can measure it with an electrical signal,
where you just see if you can run it
through the machine that gives you some percentage.
But the easier way, if you're not in the lab,
is you just plant them and you see, do they germinate?
So if my embryon's alive, it will germinate.
And if it never--
so then you can get a percentage.
I put out 100 seeds, and five of them germinated.
question do you plant it in a pergamino?
right? i try just growing some seeds from it
you can't? oh you wanted to grow some seeds?
in pergamino yes. i was gonna say like a
maybe it's the amount of time that it spends with the acid
if it's a really acidic environment like if you're doing like a really long
permit and it's getting really really acidic
and it's sitting in the acidic for a long time maybe that's going to be
not very long? i think that's a good point so it's it's many things it could
either be the lack of oxygen, it could be the really high acidity, it could be the time. So
you can't just say 72 hours kills an embryo. No. Okay, why cacao you need, like it's better
to have the embryo, actually you need to have the embryo die and not in coffee, you know? Because my
understanding is like when it dies you start to release certainties in the cells that is going
gonna affect your flavor right? I don't know.
I think I've never thought about why we want it, an idea of why we want it to die.
I think germinated cacao tastes too bitter.
Yeah, it's like poor quality.
Like it's an actual defect.
If it's germinated, you throw it out.
So I was told that it's because it's poor quality
like in plant products, but in coffee,
it's just such a different world,
that I'm not really sure like,
what I'd bring.
- Yeah, I don't know either.
- Chef's degree, or does it, longevity of chef life?
- Well, the more aliveness you have,
the more, the higher percentage,
the longer your chef life, like in coffee.
- Isn't, like, thinking about it cut down,
doesn't necessarily need that same chocolate, right?
Isn't it processed a lot faster since it can be stored longer?
It's processed a lot faster.
And going back to the original point where we eat--
let's see, we eat that thing.
We have the cacao.
With coffee, it's more processing, more steps.
So--
So you're eating a chocolate-covered espresso.
Unless you're eating a chocolate-covered espresso.
Yeah.
So going back to the tablet a little bit, if you're going to do a natural process,
this uniformity is really important.
You really want your coffee to be highly selected and all red if you're going to do a natural
process, if you're going to do dry.
If we're doing our tank, less important.
less important.
So this is the way that I think of it is that
we had coffee cherries and we saw all the different colors. We saw the skittle. So we know that the red ones are probably
around 55 moisture content. This is how much water is in the fruit. And the ones that are green
maybe they have a little bit more because
they're just these green seeds. The ones that are overripe, the ones, these like raisins, are obviously going to have less moisture content.
So you have all of these cherries starting out at the different internal moisture, but we want them all to get to 11%
We want everything to be at this end point
So it's like you're starting a race and everybody's starting in a different position
So the time that it takes you to get from 25% to 11 or 58 to 11
It's a different amount of time. It's a different fermentation. So we think of like one batch of process
but each each fruit is a bioreactor. Each fruit is its own little fermentation in isolation.
Each one is doing its own thing. So in this case you have a lot of cup to cup variation
when you're not sorting like this. When you don't start with a really even ripeness. So Julie,
you must spend a lot of time sorting. That must be one of your bigger expenses? Not too bad,
but that's because we're a highly trained crew of like three people.
So you're picking well.
Yeah, so we're picking very well.
So yeah.
So that's the goal, leave it in the field.
Exactly.
Don't bring it and then have to kind of go through all this stuff.
So this creates a lot of variation.
If you're starting at a different point and you're all going to the same place,
all getting there at different times.
The contrast and why I like to work with washed coffees
is because we take all of these different moisture levels
and we pulp them, we remove the outer layer,
we submerge them, and then we can kind of standardize them.
The ones that are drier can take up a little bit of moisture,
maybe the ones that are too high can sort of equilibrate,
and we can get a much more uniform starting mass.
So now instead of all starting at different points,
we can all start at the same point
and we move as a group together.
We all move towards the 11%.
So this is why I have a higher tolerance in the wash coffees
of how much I'm allowing to go into my tank.
That's why I'm not so picky.
If I was making a natural, I would be super picky.
- Unless you submerge it in water, or even then.
- Well, even then, I mean, that helps a lot,
but even then you still have even more layers.
So, you know, she's submerging for three days,
so maybe it takes them 72 hours for that water to permeate.
and get more of that evenness.
I think that really helps for that reason as well.
But again, I'm just looking at that.
Do you have any visuals in terms of like, um,
what to use in, like, 23% of the universe is flat?
Do you base your work on that?
I haven't done that study, I don't know.
This is like my idea.
This is like a representation of what I think is happening
and why I do it this way.
Do you think you can test it and it'll help?
Like, if you--
How would I test that?
So the problem is most moisture meters don't test above 30.
So I could potentially do it by weight,
like how much it's weighing and seeing how much it's
losing over time.
But no, I haven't done it.
But I think you could with weight.
Moisture meter would be too hard.
But you could try that experiment, see how much.
So like, yes, what's the tolerance?
What's the threshold?
How do we know that one that's as low as 23
can actually kind of go back up?
I haven't done experiments,
so I don't know that I can do that,
but we've seen that coffee's incredibly,
high-gross, not fake, we want it,
when we soak it, especially green coffee,
we can bring the moisture up very readily.
So this is, you know, you know Dima.
- Well, I already know him.
- You know of Dima.
So I was in--
- School of life.
I was in Africa at the same time as him.
We didn't plan it.
We just happened to be there at the same time
in Rwanda, visiting the same person.
So I spent, I spent like 20 days with him.
- That was enough to get the feeling, right?
- He is very, yeah.
Like, when you think of crazy Russian, he is like...
- Super crazy.
(laughs)
- Yeah, I've never met anyone more crazy than him.
- I have a picture I can show you.
No, yeah, he was very, he's very nice,
but he's very much a crazy Russian.
So, this was his version, a natural.
So he had all of these cherries on these raised beds,
but you can see they all have moisture.
So he was trying to accomplish this like funkiness
by having a natural coffee in the cherry
act more like a wash, keeping the moisture up.
So he called these sanchichas, which are like hot dogs.
That was the word.
So you have these plastic bags, so you
have a low moisture content in these raised beds.
So it's a similar thing to what Julie's trying to accomplish
with increasing the moisture but keeping it in cherry
and not getting a traditional natural profile.
So these are just creative ways that you can...
But the whole thing was also that he used black plastic just before...
This is something to do with a UV that did not...
Because he had it once in Rwanda, he asked to buy black one,
and they were like, "There's no black, we want green."
Yeah.
And it all went a bit wrong because...
This I just don't remember because we're not really like out giving the...
But this is something to do with the like, that UV is something, and with the black you prevent it.
So with like yellow, green, you just have this interaction from the sun with your fermentation
process. So it's either, I don't know, maybe it speeds it up or it's just something that has...
That doesn't make sense to me. Like, if he thinks it's color related because it's UV related,
that that's a hard sell. Meaning that for me the color I do believe that it influences but I think
the color would have more to do with like the temperature so that black got hotter and potentially
killed off most of the microbes so he had like a very mild or whatever like result that he was
looking for so less defects or less of the thing that he didn't want whereas another color didn't
and get it taught and get it accomplished,
that kill step.
Because, again, if you want,
like, yeah, UV and coffee is not very well studied
and there's not a lot of information
and most of it, like, I just,
I don't know if you've seen any.
(laughs)
So whatever he was doing was just like,
he saw something, he had a feeling,
and then he's like trying to explain it
with his own observations and not from any study,
like, not science that I've seen.
But then there is just the water. It's basically a tank but on a bed.
Yeah, basically a tank on a bed.
And for how long can it do this? Like three days?
Yeah, like three days.
But then how are you going to get rid of the water?
You just pull the plastic out and then it just stays like a natural.
Yeah, you just kind of pull it out.
So yeah, pretty simple.
And I think, well, and some of the things that we talked about, some of the, well, so this was even with the black plastic.
So, I mean, I, for me, I was like, that doesn't make me want to try it.
Like, sitting in a cupboard and mold. But he was happy with the result. That's what he was looking for.
So, the beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
I mean, it looks, when you look at the green, it's not green anymore.
It looks like really brown. Basically it's like a mix of the sour cherries, would you say?
But and yeah, I find that I mean he describes it all the coffees really
Diversely, but at the end and he's making it right now all over like Costa Rica, Colombia, Ethiopia
For me, it's personally tastes a bit more or less the same
So people love it, people buying it and this is the whole thing and he's just like producing it a lot of right now
but personally, we just get to the point that it all like got to some point
a bit all fermented, a bit vinegarish flavor to me.
So, personally, I...
I think that we talked about this in the Spanish session too,
that, okay, so I'm making this argument that processing isn't going to mask your coffee.
It's not going to make everything taste the same inherently.
But it's not that it can ever do that because that's an example of it.
example of it. When you have something that is so strong and so like
intentional, yes you can get to the point what you're saying is that he's doing
this process on all these coffees from all over the world and they're really
the same. They're really you know evening out and that same thing was said in the
other group of another process. Like an aerobic for example. Yeah it's so strong it's like
okay one from Costa Rica tastes the same as one from Peru tastes the same as one from
So why am I bothering?
So I think that's dangerous because the whole point of processing is it was giving the producer an opportunity to become empowered.
To say, "I have a voice. I have a place in coffee production."
Because the traditional method is commodity, meaning I'm just going to get whatever's cheaper because I'm just going to roast it, whatever, and sort of move on.
And then we had this opportunity for producers
to have a site, to have a place,
and think about processing.
And now the processing is so strong
that we're reverting back to,
it doesn't matter where this process is coming from,
so I'll just buy the cheapest one.
If coffee's cheaper from Costa Rica right now,
I'll get that anaerobic from Costa Rica
instead of that anaerobic from Kenya or whatever.
Kenya's a bad example,
'cause I don't do that much experimental process,
but you get the idea.
So it's like, it's kind of come full circle.
Like, coffee producers were in the struggle of being lost in commodity,
and then they've kind of been able to have this voice.
And now it's just going back, reverting to--
Where's coffee?
No!
[LAUGHTER]
And now we're reverting to, oh, OK, all these processes taste the same,
so I'll just get the cheapest one, which is not the point of differentiating
your coffee.
Do you think there's any way to actually fight against that
in our current climate?
or is that just kind of like the cycle of
like the people who have like power influence
to say at the consuming end,
will kind of always cycle back and be like,
oh, we liked that you did this,
now we want to control this thing.
- I mean, for me, the way to fight it is like that,
like you're literally fighting a wave,
like you're fighting the ocean
and it just doesn't make any sense.
Like trends are gonna be trends,
and they're gonna die and they're gonna come back.
We're gonna have bell bottoms,
we're gonna have skinny jeans,
we're gonna have bell bottoms,
we're gonna have skinny jeans.
You're not gonna like escape that cycle.
So the way that I think you actually can fight it
is by not participating.
So most people are like,
"Oh, I'm gonna fight it by being ahead of the curve."
I'm like, "I just don't play."
Just don't play, and then you don't have to fight it,
and then you don't have to be behind it
or figure out where you are with it.
So that's why I try to work with producers to say,
"Don't figure out how you can make your coffee more crazy,
"'cause then you're always fighting yourself.
"You always have to talk yourself next time.
"Figure out how to make your natural profile
36 hours instead of 22 days and then like go on a vacation or have time with your family or like get a hobby
Like do something else
Instead of spending more time
like hiding in this like
really difficult
market. And they came up in the Spanish group as well
Don Marco gave an example of a producer who did this very complicated process
The copy did really well, he got 90 points and then he's like next year
I'm gonna do more and he like pushed harder like double down and the coffee was actually came back in
87 which is still a really good coffee but it's like look you had just kept doing what you were
doing I figured out how to replicate your 90 and done the same you'd be ahead of more effort more
expense and a less less of a return now your coffee is a little bit lower so there's this
like delicate line where you want like I want producers to innovate I want them to be creative
But I'm seeing so many of them shoot themselves in the foot.
They're trying too hard.
I think there are always gonna be some who just, like, want to do it for shits and giggles,
because it's fun, but not for--I think you're advocating--that's not the game for everybody.
Yeah, like, figuring out--like, for me, one of those people is Enrique Lopez and Pikachu,
and then, like, I've been to his spot twice, I've stayed in his house, like, I love this guy,
And I know that his experimentation comes from his soul needs to do this.
And he is such a beautiful unicorn. I love him.
But then so many producers see that and they're like, "I need to be like that."
And I'm like, "If it's not coming from your heart, this is a tough road to travel."
And he's so effortless in his experimentation and his creativity.
Where's that from?
Enrique Lopez, Pinta Chilin.
In what?
In Oaxaca.
And then we had to actually take him to the room and then they said we can reveal his
body.
So yeah.
But that's like the unicorn, not the wolf.
And so many producers think they have to get there and they feel that like, "Oh, I'm being
left behind."
Like artists think they need to be Picasso or Dali or, you know, whomever, but like,
just paint what you want to paint.
And the part where he's like, "I'm going to be a wolf."
And then he's like, "I'm going to be a wolf."
"Oh, I'm being left behind."
- Like artists think they need to be Picasso or Dali
or, you know, whomever, but like,
just paint what you wanna paint.
- And the part that's not talked about as much
is that most buyers, most consumers are like,
"I just want a wash.
"I just want like a clean washed coffee."
And a lot of the conversations on our Discord channel
have been other exporters in like in Australia,
and it's like, "My wash is like the thing
"that sells out the fastest."
It's like, "I have all these experimental coffees,
what people are asking for in my lives.
But this is, I think it really depends on
when you're
when you're starting to buy for the
specialty, because I mean
I could see like comparing like
for example Russian market and European market
like Russian market
you know already like, you know a couple of years ago
everybody was like, okay we are done with it
we just want to get back to bush
and then European people are still like, yeah
Jesus, I really like this fermented
stuff, and you're like
It's such a 2020.
It's so 2020.
And, like in the United States that had a little bit more of a developed market, a lot of that was like, "Oh, that's so 2018."
So, depending exactly on where you are in your market's maturity, and what I think that shows, so right now Asia, Dubai, Korea, that's who really wants these copies.
And so all of these producers are scrambling to make them.
And I'm like, OK, history has shown us
that everyone's going to get tired of those coffees real
fast.
The wave has already passed everyone else.
So now you're selling to Korea.
And then they're going to get bored
and want these washed coffees again.
And then you're going to be like, who wants some coffee?
But people are still--
I mean, not in many people, but mainly producers and exporters,
they're trying to just jump in this train that's already
sort of like leaving.
The train is already-- yeah.
But because-- especially in Ethiopia,
I just mean in December and like there's a really nice exporter who was like selling for years
Beautiful clean washed and natural coffees and then like last table. It's all I know a little bit fermented stuff and we like it's a gross
You just don't want to drink it at all. She's like I love it
I mean, I don't know it's like sincere saying that she loves it. But of course everybody's like, okay
This is we sell to the Asia and Dubai
So they still sort of like people still buying there, but we are all questioning like for how long
Because like I think it feels like one two years and then it's gonna be
I think a lot of competition coffee
Mostly comes from Colombia with some kind of fancy
I mean, the process and the price is so high.
And in Thailand, we also are very crazy about this kind of coffee.
But I mean, if that influences the coffee producers here to do the same stuff?
I think that's two things.
So the question from Kanatha is like, well, what's next?
And so we're kind of like passing through most of the consuming countries.
countries. So what's next is producing countries, producing countries that have a growing consumer
base. So Mexico and so the newbies, all of the new people in producing countries,
they're going to be able to ride that wave. So at some point it's getting recycled
in that sense. So I think that's going to be, because it's such a gateway, it's such an
entry point into specialty coffee that that's where I see it going. But again, I think it's
a really hard road because it's like you're making something that's about to go out of fashion and
you're just hoping. Lizard. Oh, lizard? There's a big lizard here. Like, oh no, that's another
lizard. I guess I need to go on now. Does it scream? I haven't heard it. You know that one?
- I think that's something that's--
(laughing)
- So that's, we're gonna stop there for today.
A lot more questions and then we have dinner in an hour.
Oh yeah, sorry, we're measuring.
No, don't go, stay here.
We're gonna go measure our fermentation tank.
So let's grab the Spanish group and we'll meet at the tank.
We need to make some things for our daddies.